---
title: Life, time, relativity and infinity
topic: Life
description: What exactly is a lifetime? What's the most appropriate way to think about it?
date: 2020-07-09
---

How do you think about your life in relation to time? I suspect that most people
think about this the wrong way - let me explain.

When my sister got her first son in 2016 I joked with her:

> What is it like waking up having never gone to sleep?

A seemingly silly question that is easy to ask, but very hard to make any sense
of. Similarly, in a funeral we might think:

> What is it like going to sleep, never to wake up again?

These two questions touches the boundaries for what we call life. Birth, a past
experience no one remember, and death, a future experience we're experientially
blind to.

The keywords here are _past_ and _future_. Baked into the language of how we
commonly talk about our life, birth and death, lies the notion that the concepts
can be fixed on a timeline. This timeline constitutes a lifetime for us human
beings. It can be visualised as a line with three points (Birth, Present, and
Death) which appropriately map to past, present and future.

TOOD: Insert slider?

This is a pretty nice mental modal [[1]](#footnote-1) It's easy and straight
forward. Using this model we can calculate lifetime as the distance between
Birth and Death. Normal people call this distance _age_.

However simple, I belive that thinking of as that something you have _ahead of
you_ is slightly incorrect.

### Sometimes you're behind, somtimes you're ahead

If someone feeling "behind" on life, it might be comforting to reassure them
"Don't worry, you got most of your life in front of you". But strictly speaking,
we really don't know.

If you think about it, no part of your life is in front of you. I believe that
we are the sum of our _past_ experiences and _present_ sensations, but the
_future_ hasn't happened yet, so how can most of your life be there? This seems
quite strange to me.

I get what you're thinking:

> This is overly pedantic, very pessimistic and also kinda sad – stop it! The
> phrase is just a positive way of saying most of your life hasn't happened yet

You might be right. But something happened when I challenged it: I started
asking myself, if "life isn't some variable thing dependent of how old you are –
is it fixed?". Of course it have to be: If I died this very second, then my life
would be over, right? No future events, only past and present. So instead of
thinking that life is something I have ahead of me, I'm living at the edge of
death, aren't I? In fact, we all are.

Again, sorry if this hits you as very grim – it's not intended to. But it
started to increasingly make sense while reflecting over my past experiences:
Didn't time pass much slower when you were younger? I remember the dreaded car
trips during summer vacation – they took forever! But when we finally arrived
some 3 hours later, it was just like time stood still. Those 8 weeks of vacation
seemed like forever.

While the days were long when I was younger, these days time seem to be speeding
up. In my mind, the cause of this effect becomes easier to spot after deleting
the negative space of future lifetime from the mental model of my own life. In
other words, is our experience of time related to the time spent on this earth?
It certainly seem so.

**Let's look at an example:**

TODO: Add car trip example?

Maybe this can be used to build empathy for people younger/older than yourself?
If not, I just hope you found this interesting in some way or form and that it
wasn't a waste of your time ✌️

<footnote id="footnote-1">

I originally started to ponder about this back in 2012. In 2015, I made an
attempt at creating a small CLI that made it possible to calculate the
experienced time between N people (<a
href="https://github.com/rix1/time">source</a>).

In the time since, I've came back to thinking about this several times. Although
not directly related, I suggest checking out "I Am a Strange Loop" from Douglas
Hofstadter and "How Emotions Are Made" by Lisa Feldman Barrett if you found
topic this interesting.

</footnote>
